---
layout: post
title: My Top 10 Manga
published: true
---

While I don’t consider myself a weeaboo(I prefer the term “King Weeb Supreme”), I have certainly read more manga than just about anyone I know. That’s not to say I’m an expert, but, compared to a lot of my weeb-y friends who gravitate more towards anime, I’ve spent a lot of time reading manga. It’s fast to consume, and the black-and-white printing makes the visuals easy to follow(compared to western comics, which often make my eyes hurt). It may be odd, but even when both anime and manga are available, I often prefer reading to watching(although this isn’t always true when there’s a good anime adaptation). I guess there lies an appeal in going back to the source, in the same way many people prefer books to their movie adaptations. My fondness for manga combined with that Stalcup penchant to rank everything (check out my brother’s “Top 100 Everything” over on his far-superior version of this site, earnthis.net) led to an inevitable desire to put down on the page what exactly I like about my favorite manga, and how they measure up to each other.

In the below list I have attempted to give an approximate ranking of my ten favorite manga. In order to keep things diverse, I’ve given each ranking on the list a focus and provided some alternatives that gave me similar impressions on reading. You’ll notice that, despite my attempt at providing variety in the list, my selections are actually quite narrow – lots of coming of age, shounen, sports, and fantasy manga, and very little sci-fi, horror, shoujo, or pure dramas. I could excuse away my limited taste by saying that I like to read manga to relax and unwind, and genres like sci-fi and horror are often heady, depressing affairs. I could also note that, until quite recently, I was a member of the target demographic for shounen manga, not shoujo manga. However, instead of pointing out these things to preserve my pride, I’ll admit that, yes, I read a relatively narrow range of manga. I didn’t think it was quite so narrow until I started drafting this list, but here we are. I promise, in the future, I’ll make time for the _Fruits Baskets, Plutos_, and _Uzumakis_ of the manga world. But until then, this is what I’m stuck with.

Here are a few rules for the list:

1.	It’s my list
2.	No webtoons, manhua, manhwa, or anything else – this is a strict Japanese Language Manga Only list (I might write a separate list later, especially for webtoons)
3.	I tried to avoid including Manga with good, complete anime adaptations, because if that exists it’s almost always worth it to just watch the anime. In case there is an anime adaptation, I’ve included that information after the entry of the list, as well as whether or not the manga itself is completed.
4.	While this list is a genuine expression of my fondness for these series, It’s also supposed to serve as a series of recommendations, and feel free to shoot me an email for more recommendations if you want em.
5.	These rules have really turned into comments, but oh well, thems the rules. 
6.	As always, have fun!  

Now, without further bloviating, onto the list.

---

**Honorable Mention:[_Whistle!_ – Daisuke Higuchi:](https://myanimelist.net/manga/52/Whistle)**


* My love of anime can be traced back, like many other Americans’, to watching _Naruto, One Piece, Dragonball Z_ , 	and other shows on Toonami, Cartoon Network’s Saturday night anime block. My love of manga, however, has slightly 	different, more specific origins. In August 2003, the Ashburn library opened about two miles from my house to much hullabaloo. I was eight at the time, and thus don’t have too many specific memories of the occasion, besides getting lost in the crowd at the opening event. As I went through elementary and middle school, this library became a hub of activity for me, and I found myself visiting there at least once every few weeks. In particular, I found myself following my older brother Patrick to the manga section, browsing their collection of novel, foreign comics as my mother finished her business. I can say now that their collection was not that big, filled with mostly mainstream, shounen manga, with gaps in the catalogue, often skipping volumes. At the time it seemed huge. It was almost overwhelming looking at the dozens of volumes, and I had trouble deciding what to read. Eventually I gravitated to _Whistle!,_ a manga about soccer, a sport I played though much of elementary school and part of middle school. Over the next few years, I probably read the first seven or eight volumes of _Whistle!_ ten times. Looking back now, I realize that reading _Whistle!_ formed the basis of my taste in manga: I love sports manga, I love hard-working, earnest, passionate heroes, I love coming-of-age stories, I love the high school setting._Whistle!_ has all of these things. While it may have eventually been eclipsed by other manga in my mind, I’ll always remember it fondly as the starting point for my reading habits that persist today. 
  
Completed: Yes  
Anime Adaptation: Yes(unwatched)  

**10.[_She, the Ultimate Weapon/Saishū Heiki Kanojo_ – Shin Takahashi:](https://myanimelist.net/manga/773/Saishuu_Heiki_Kanojo)** 

* This manga tells the story of the budding relationship between Shuuji and Chise, our main characters, and the problems that they encounter: inexperience, awkwardness, and the fact that Chise has become a weapon of war in what may truly be “the war to end all wars”. When I decided to write this list, I did a fair bit of thinking back on all the manga I had ever read, deciding what I loved enough to earn a spot. When I thought about _She, the Ultimate Weapon,_ it struck me that the events of the manga were less important than the feelings it left me with: that beautiful cocktail of emotions that comes with well-executed catastrophe dramas. The perseverance in the search for humanity in an unforgiving world; the twisting of that very humanity as society erodes; the mundane nature of daily life juxtaposed with the breakdown of society; the insistence that despite the world crumbling around us, there remains room for passion and emotion; the tragedy of knowing that things might not work out, no matter what you do. When I get to the inevitable ending, I can’t tell if it is beautiful or grotesque, optimistic or nihilistic, romantic or tragic. All I know is it sticks with me.

Other Manga that could have taken this spot: _Oyasumi punpun, Akira_  
Anime Adaptation: Yes(unwatched)  
Completed: Yes  


**9. [_Rave/Rave Master/The Groove Adventure Rave_ – Hiro Mashima:](https://myanimelist.net/manga/14/Rave)**

* Let’s take a step back from the drama, from the tragedy, from the bleakness of close examination of the human condition and focus some good, old-fashioned adventure. _Rave_ follows the story of Haru Glory(great name, btw), the titular Rave Master, and his friends, Elie and Musica, as they search for the Rave stones to topple the Evil Organization Demon Card and put a stop to the use of the Dark Bring. On the surface, _Rave_ is a run-of-the-mill battle Shounen series. It’s a story about a group of globetrotting friends on a grandiose mission to save the world. There’s comedy, action, drama, and a hint of romance to keep us interested. When you look deeper… There’s not much more to it than that. If I had to point to one stand out element of _Rave_, it would be the fantastical feel of its world (in the first chapter alone we see Plue, a weird horn-nosed thing, and Nakajima, a wall-mounted sun creature). In my mind, there’s nothing particularly transcendental about _Rave_, and, honestly, much of its story is really generic. But at the same time, there’s almost nothing to dislike. Unlike so many other battle Shounen series (I’m looking at you, Naruto, One Piece, Bleach, Fairy Tail, Reborn) it doesn’t lose focus and meander off into nonsense for 500 chapters. And, perhaps most shockingly, it has a great ending, something almost inherently difficult in the world of serialized manga, where ending something popular naturally means you lose your way of putting food on the table. So It’s a good story with a good ending and a whole lotta heart (plus a fair bit of nostalgia). Sometimes, that’s all you need to make something great.

Other manga that could have taken this spot: _Psyren, Kekkaishi, Medaka Box_  
Completed: Yes  
Anime Adaptation: Yes(unwatched and notoriously bad in English)  

**8. [_Komi Can’t Communicate /Komi-san wa, comyushou desu._ – Tomohito Oda:](https://myanimelist.net/manga/99007/Komi-san_wa_Comyushou_desu)**

* I wish making friends was like this in real life. There’s no cynicism or underhandedness, just people learning to accept others for what they are, and helping people to become their best selves. The premise is simple enough, our main character, a very average boy named Tadano Hitohito uses his one exceptional ability (reading the room) to realize that the class idol Komi Shoko is not an ice queen, just painfully awkward. After realizing her plight, Tadano quickly decides to help her in her goal of making 100 friends. It’s a simple enough premise, but the writing of the characters (with heavy use of tropes and puns) makes for a fun, innocent manga that revels in youthful positivity. It’s addicting to read about these characters as their relationships build (especially if you like a “JUST KISS ALREADY” atmosphere), and I usually find myself smiling when I read the newest chapter. The art is also fantastic, and “cute komi”(you’ll know it when you see it) is the perfect mascot for a manga like this. If I had to level one criticism on the manga, it would be that, despite there being 300-odd chapters written, there is little development in the main romantic plotline. However, I didn’t come here for the romance, but to revel at silly characters doing silly things to build silly friendships.

Other manga that could have taken this spot: _Bokura wa minna kawaisou, The World God Only Knows, Hayate no Gotoku!_  
Completed: No  
Anime Adaptation: No  


**7. [_Blue Giant_ – Shinichi Ichizuka:](https://myanimelist.net/manga/85719/Blue_Giant)**

* Music presents a difficult obstacle for a purely visual medium like manga. How do you express the sound of a crescendo, the passion of a solo, the energy of a live performance, when your only tools are black and white ink? To answer this question, look no further than _Blue Giant_. Jazz music comes to life on the pages of _Blue Giant_, a loving tribute to the so-often misrepresented genre. If you asked the average person about their opinions of jazz, you’d likely get a picture painted of either stodgy old coots reliving their glory years or pretentious snobs spouting endless jargon at you. But, anyone who knows a little about the history of jazz and its practitioners knows that this picture couldn’t be further of the truth. Jazz is throwing your emotion out there, putting complex feelings to music. Shinichi Ishizuka clearly understands this, and I need no more evidence than the fiery passion of the jazz on the pages of _Blue Giant_. There’s endless drive, conflict, and a deep understanding that music is a subjective, performative art. You do it from the heart, and you do it your own way. As a fan of jazz and a lover of music at large, it’s impossible for me not to love _Blue Giant_. I rank this manga highly and recommend it with a caveat, though. The fan translation of _Blue Giant_ only covers the first 50-or-so chapters, and only the first 2 of 10 volumes have been officially published in English. It’s a brilliant manga, but we might have to wait a while in the west to get the full story.

Other manga that could have taken this spot: _Beck, Nana_  
Completed: Yes(in Japanese)/ No(in English)  
Anime Adaptation: No  

**6.[_Rookies_ – Masanori Morita:](https://myanimelist.net/manga/915/Rookies)**

* If I learned anything from reading _Rookies_ , it’s that the only thing more badass than succeeding on your own is mentoring someone else to succeed. This manga follows a group of delinquents on their unlikely journey from school disgraces to their goal of qualifying for the Koshien. It’s a funny, heartwarming, thrilling story of friendship and redemption. And this redemption is no small thing. At the beginning of the story, the baseball club is a violent, deplorable place. Everyone has given up on them: the school expects nothing out of them; the student body fears them; and they have no drive to do anything but fight, smoke, and waste time. Enter Kawato, thickheaded, earnest, passionate teacher who does little beyond endlessly believe in his students and expect the best out of them. Firm in his belief that an educator’s purpose is to motivate students to achieve their dreams, he drags them, kicking and screaming, to redemption. After such a low start, it’s impossible not to feel something when their hard work brings success. That said, _Rookies_ probably isn’t for everyone. It’s crass, perverted, and sometimes regressive in its treatment of women, but that’s par for the course when dealing with “yankee” manga. In the end, the highest praise I can give to _Rookies_ is it makes me want to be a better teacher, not for my sake, but for my students’. 

Other Manga that could have taken this spot: _GTO, Denpa Kyoushi, Slam Dunk_  
Completed: Yes  
Anime Adaptation: No (But there is a famous Drama adaptation, as well as a movie)(unwatched)  


**5. [_Katsu!_ – Adachi Mitsuru:](https://myanimelist.net/manga/1185/Katsu)** 

* Adachi Mitsuru is my favorite mangaka. I’ve read all his major works and have never been disappointed (except with _Miyuki_ , his woefully dated 80s romance manga that is a catastrophe of predatory behavior towards women). I’m eagerly awaiting the completion of his current work, a baseball manga called _Mix_ , so I can binge read it in one weekend. Honestly, I had to limit myself or else mostly Mitsuru works would populate this list. Most famous for his baseball manga, _Touch_ (one of under 20 manga that have sold more than 100 million volumes), he has had successful manga in Seinen, Shoujo, and Shounen magazines(an extremely rare accomplishment). His manga perfectly captures the atmosphere of youth. It’s not the naïve, optimistic youthfulness of a young person, but the deliberate inevitability of change and growth that speaks to an adult reflecting on youth from the outside. This atmosphere manifests in characters that are almost inevitably successful, with endless passion, talent, and drive. There’s a finality in their decisions, a sense that they’re etching their paths in stone. The dialogue is literary in its subtext, reveling in that Japanese indirectness. He doesn’t overexplain, rarely directly stating the characters’ thoughts and instead relying on the reader to understand from context. The drama is real and heavy, and tragedy realistically affects the characters, lingering in their relationships. This drama contrasts light, irreverent humor and persistent, exciting action. He frequently breaks the fourth wall and talks to his audience, making full use of the medium of a comic. His art immerses you in the moment, and you can almost feel the settings he draws – a hot, sweaty summer day or a cold but cozy snowy night. The character designs are charming but retro, thrusting you back in time to the more old-fashioned stylings of the 70s and 80s he’s always used. His use of facial expressions is wonderful, and it endlessly baffles me how I can read so much emotion from what’s no more than a few lines on a page. All of this comes together into a product that few mangaka can hope to match, and I believe none do with such consistency. Of course he’s not without his flaws: his treatment of women in some of his early manga could generously be called outdated, and his insistence on filling all of his manga with scantily clad (high-school, usually) girls grates on me. But that’s an island of criticism in an ocean of praise.  
However, this is an entry in a top 10 manga list for _Katsu!,_ so I probably shouldn’t spend all my text without mentioning anything about the manga itself. In my mind, though, it’s hard to separate what I like about Katsu! from what I like about Mitsuru. It’s a great coming-of-age story where our plucky main character steps into the world of boxing, coming to terms with his talent and identity as he navigates friendships, rivalries, and growing up. The matches are tense, the humor works well, the drama is interesting, and the romance is fun. I love Adachi Mitsuru works, and I love Katsu! for being a vehicle for his storytelling talent.

Other manga that could have taken this spot: Rough, Q and A  
Completed: Yes  
Anime Adaptation: No  

**4. [_Fullmetal Alchemist_ – Hiromu Arakawa:](https://myanimelist.net/manga/25/Fullmetal_Alchemist)** 

* This is perhaps the most typical entry on this list. Everyone lavishes _Fullmetal Alchemist_ with praise, and with good reason. The story follows Edward and his Brother Alphonse, alchemists of the state, on their journey to find the philosopher’s stone. Earlier, when I talked about good shounen manga while praising _Rave_, I mentioned that sometimes, if you have a good story and a good ending, that’s all you need for a great manga. In order to push it to the next level, though, you need a bit more than that. Nuance, depth, thought-provoking themes, these are the things that set FMA apart from its contemporaries. What makes a human a human? What purpose does morality have in the pursuit of truth? How responsible are we for our sins, the sins of the past, and retribution for what’s been done? FMA seeks to answer these questions. It does so on the backdrop of an epic, exciting battle Shounen manga that navigates a spectacular balancing act, mixing tragedy, comedy, philosophy, mystery, adventure, and action seamlessly. FMA is a critical darling and beloved by fans. It has an Anime adaptation, _Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood_, that frequently takes top spots on greatest-of-all-time anime lists. The plot is great, the characters and their relationships are great, the fight scenes are great. Everyone has heard of FMA, and everyone knows it’s great. If you haven’t read it yet, you’ve probably watched the anime. And if you haven’t watched the anime, consider that your homework assignment.  
Side note: I know in my rules section, I said I would avoid putting in manga that has a good anime adaptation. FMA is the exception to that rule. While I love the anime adaptation, I finished the manga long before I watched it, so my experience with FMA is first and foremost of the manga.

Other manga that could have taken this spot: _Spirit Circle, Lucifer and the Biscuit Hammer_  
Completed: Yes  
Anime Adaptation: Yes (2, actually, though avoid the first one and stick to Brotherhood)(watched)  

**3. [_Kingdom_ – Yasuhisa Hara:](https://myanimelist.net/manga/16765/Kingdom)**

* Sometimes I want a reflective, contemplative manga, and sometimes I just want to read about armies killing each other on the battlefield. To scratch this violent itch, I turn to _Kingdom_ , the manga adaptation of a fictional account of the first unification of China under the Qin dynasty. We follow the peasant Li Xin as he rises through the ranks of the military to fulfill his childhood dream and aid in the ambitions of King Ying Zheng who dreams of unifying China. It’s difficult for me to imagine a better executed war manga. The battles are masterfully written: the simultaneous focus on strategies and personal struggles leads to a feeling of watching the gears turn on a grand machine, with a special focus on those particular moments that decide whether a battle is won or lost. The character narratives of the micro play out wonderfully on the macro, the armies an extension of their generals’ personality. It blurs the line of realism and fantasy wonderfully, but not enough so that we abandon the historical narrative. There is enough drama and tragedy mixed with the action to keep us interested in the characters and remind us that when they’re not slicing up hundreds of men on the battlefield, they too are human. We get a strong sense of the characters’ personal growth as they get stronger and their commands get larger. It’s gory, violent, exciting, epic, and all together fun. If you’re in the mood for some chest-thumping, blood-pumping, china-unifying action, I can’t recommend _Kingdom_ enough. I will warn you, though, that the first 50-or-so chapters are basically a prologue, and, while it’s good from the start, it doesn’t get truly great until Xin joins the military.  

Other manga that could have taken this spot: _Vinland Saga_  
Completed: No  
Anime Adaptation: Yes(unwatched, couldn’t get past the art style)  

**2. [_Grand Blue_ – Kenji Inoue and Kimitake Yoshioka:](https://myanimelist.net/manga/70345/Grand_Blue)**

* There has never been a manga that captures the nonsense of friendship as perfectly as _Grand Blue_. But before I get into the writing of the manga, I want to say that the art is fantastic, especially the facial expressions. Of course, it’s perverted at times(though unlike most perverted manga, there’s far more male nudity than female nudity), but this works well with the college-aged setting and the focus on the sexual humor and general perversion of college students. Now, the writing. The premise involves a college freshman, Iori, who moves to a beachside town and joins his college’s diving club, making new friends along the way. This premise quickly descends into hanging out with friends, binge drinking, and games of strip rock-paper-scissors. It is gut-bustingly funny: simultaneously relatable to anyone who over-indulged in their youth as a college student and over-the-top in the extremity of their shenanigans. What sets _Grand Blue_ apart, though, is that beneath the humor there is immense heart. The characters read like genuine friends, constantly arguing and fighting with each other until it counts. They make jokes at each other’s expense, endlessly scheme against each other, and are combative to the extreme. But when push comes to shove, you see their heart, and it’s a marvel how great it can be to read about friends just being friends. On top of all that, the main character is perhaps the most likeable manga character I know. He’s ridiculous, friendly, hilarious, and the focal point of what pushes _Grand Blue_ above any other comedy manga I’ve ever read.

Other recommendations: (Anime) _Baka and Test and Summoned Monsters_ (same writer as _Grand Blue_)  
Completed: No  
Anime Adaptation: Yes(watched)  


**1. [_H2_ – Adachi Mitsuru:](https://myanimelist.net/manga/1014/H2)**

* Anybody who has ever spoken to me at length about manga knew this was coming. _H2_ is my favorite manga. It’s been my favorite manga since I first read it, has remained so on each reread, and probably will forever be my favorite. Before, in my description of _Katsu!_ I talked a little about the stylings of Adachi Mitsuru and why he’s my favorite Mangaka. If sports manga are his tools for telling a coming-of-age story, baseball seems to be his duct tape, infinitely versatile and somehow more effective each time it’s used. Baseball is the perfect setting for drama: It’s a team sport which allows our characters to naturally group up, but there’s still a heavy focus on individual duels between players, and you know sparks are going to fly when the rival inevitably steps up to the batter’s box. There are enough unique skills in baseball that you can give each character their own forte – batting, catching, fielding, pitching. And to top it off, it’s hugely popular in Japan, with their high school baseball tournament serving as the equivalent of the US’s march madness or super bowl. Combine all that with Mitsuru’s expert hand and the drama of high school life and growing up, and you’ve got a recipe for a masterpiece.  
With _H2_ , more than any other of his manga, I think Adachi Mitsuru delivers. The framing of the story is epic, two middle school stars, best friends on diametrically opposed paths to the top – the slugger and the pitcher, the underdog and the powerhouse. Old feelings change and new feelings blossom as the characters watch friends they grew up with become adults. We get to see, from day 1, the development of a baseball team – recruiting allies and convincing them that yeah, maybe this baseball thing is worth investing in. Plus, _H2_ is long, longer than any other Mitsuru manga. In his other works, the minor characters are often pushed aside in order to buoy the main characters’ stories, but in _H2_ , they’re each given the time they need, and everyone has their moment to shine. The characters, sometimes infallible on the field, are still just high schoolers, confused and conflicted in what they want out of life and undecided on what the best path is moving forward in their relationships. If I had to level one complaint towards _H2_ , it would be that Koga Haruka, one of the female leads, feels a little underdeveloped compared to the other three main characters, but despite that she somehow became maybe my favorite character in the series(I guess her persistent good-naturedness and simplicity is a depth of its own). The baseball complements the personal drama and the drama enhances the baseball. All this comes together like a snowball rolling down the mountain, slowly gaining mass and speed until the inevitable crash at the bottom. The ending is exciting, bittersweet, and perfect. Each time I finish reading _H2_ , I stop for a moment, feeling empty upon completion, thinking about what I just read. And then I simply nod to myself, sure in the fact that yes, _H2_ is my favorite manga of all time.  

Other manga that could have taken this spot: _Touch, Cross Game_  
Completed: Yes  
Anime Adaptation: Yes(unwatched)

---

So there you have it, my top 10 manga. When I started writing this, I did not expect it to be this long or take this much effort (I re-read most of the series on the list to verify my feelings, and some of them are hundreds of chapters long). Honestly, I’m not 100% happy with how it came out. There’s probably too much of a modern bias, I’m probably forgetting some series I love but read a long time ago, and I my explanations for why I chose each could be better. But still, even if I’m not 100% satisfied, I’m probably 90% of the way there. Maybe, in 6 months’ time, the order of the list would shuffle around, or I might decide to add something I omitted here, but for now, this is good enough. I don’t have a profound thought to end on, so I’ll just say this: I’m happy I get to read manga. I have read bad manga, good manga, tragic manga, funny manga, manga that gives me clout in the weeb community, and manga that I’d be embarrassed to talk about. I’m happy there exists a medium that’s given me so much joy, and I look forward to spending much more time reading in the future.
