---
layout: post
title: Stuff I Like: LitRPG Books
---

This is the first post in a series where I give my thoughts on things I like.

I have a long, storied, loudly-professed love of fantasy media and RPG games. It almost has become an obsession. Despite reading dozens of books a year, I constrain my reading almost entirely to the Fantasy genre. I have lived through no less than seven false starts to D&D campaigns (and DM’d one successful one!). My favorite movie series is (stereotypically) The Lord of the Rings, and my favorite TV show is (slightly less stereotypically) Adventure Time. Put a little beer in me and I’ll loudly proclaim that the greatest video game of all time is Final Fantasy VI, for its charming characters, sprawling narrative, addictive progression system, fantastic soundtrack, and greatest-of-all-time villain. I have played almost every Fire Emblem game to completion, including two that were only released in Japanese. I own multiple pieces of map-making software that I have used to meticulously design the world for my ever-expanding worldbuilding project, maintained on a personal wiki that is tens of thousands of words long. While this may look like a list of boasts for nerd-cred(also known as the anti-dating profile), it is paramount that you understand how important RPGs and Fantasy are to me when I make this next statement: I Love LitRPG books. Oftentimes these books are full of shoddy editing, generic worldbuilding, shallow characters, cringeworthy attempts at humor, and even-worse attempts at romance. Beyond all these flaws, though, is that ever-present allure, the diamond core, a book that not only pleases the lover of speculative fiction in me but also the gamer who loves nothing more than watching the level-up number max out at 99. In this post, I want to give you a brief summary of what a LitRPG book is and why they are appealing in my own words. Then I’ll go over some of the good, bad, and ugly things I’ve found to be common in LitRPG novels and provide a few recommendations from the books I’ve read.

## What is LitRPG (Pulp Fiction of the WoW Generation):

LitRPG, or Literary Role Playing Game, is a subgenre of speculative fiction books that heavily involve character progression and levelling up within the narrative. Specifically, this levelling up is contextualized with a game-like rpg-ish system that usually quantifies the characters’ skills and stats. Beyond that, anything goes. There are sci-fi and fantasy LitRPG books; books that take place on earth, in the digital space, and on other worlds; books about building up towns (a la the Civilization series) and books that are about building up a dungeon (a la Dungeon Keeper); and many more books besides that. When it comes down to it, what ties these books into the genre is the expression of the world’s internal workings as game mechanics.

Now why does it work? There is something extremely satisfying about numerically expressing how much of a badass a character is (or, on the other hand, how much more badass the villain is). Imagine the glee you feel when Vegeta crushes the scouter in his hand, professing Goku’s power level supremacy. Or think of one gym bro’s question to another, “How much do you bench?” There’s some kind of simple joy in looking at two numbers, thinking “wow, that number is way bigger than the other one, how is our smaller number going to overcome that bigger number?” or “Man, I can’t wait for our bigger number to smack that cocky smaller number down”.

And that’s nothing to say of perhaps LitRPG’s greatest joy: Watching these numbers go up. It’s no coincidence that I, a man who has spent an embarrassing number of hours on clicker games with no other gameplay element than “click button, watch number increase exponentially,” enjoy LitRPG books. The rush I feel when I go from a million to a billion cookies clicked is the same that I feel when I read about our main character killing a wolf, gaining 15000 experience, and levelling up. 

It follows then, that similar to how I wouldn’t consider Dragonball the peak of literary expression in Anime or label Cookie Clicker video-games-as-art (although it does bring me unexplained feelings of existential dread more potent than any horror game), I don’t consider LitRPG to be much more than pulp fiction, entertainment for the sake of entertainment. This isn’t always true (as my later recommendations will show) but I don’t expect my favorite LitRPG books to win any Pulitzers, Hugos, or Nobel Prizes anytime soon. No, the only awards I expect them to win are the “#1 best selling in <ULTRA SPECIFIC AMAZON SUBGENRE HERE>” award.

Maybe you have started to understand why I love the genre and why it seems to have a bad reputation for quality. If you haven’t, do not worry; below, I’ve listed some good, bad, and ugly parts of the genre that may help you to understand better. 


## The Good (Titillating Tropes):

- Brainy MCs – The best main characters in LitRPG books are those that are smart. This, of course, isn’t uniquely true of LitRPG books, however the frustration of dealing with an idiotic main character is amplified when you have the numbers in front of you. On the flip side, when a main character manages to outsmart the villain and twist the numbers into their favor without betraying the integrity of the system, it’s all the more satisfying because we can see, in numbers, why the main character has won and how clever he is in his calculations.
  
- Zero to Hero – There’s a reason shows like Naruto and One Piece have become so popular: Everyone likes to watch characters grow stronger. A goofy rubber boy overcoming trial after trial to become the Pirate king. A moisture farmer on a podunk planet becoming a Jedi Master. The Boy who Lived learning to take down wizard Hitler himself. Everyone loves it, and few genres are better equipped to show this ascent in power than LitRPG. Level-ups are built into the world, and with them we get an accurate sense of how much our hero has grown, how far he’s come.
  
- Society, but games – I’m always interested in how well a LitRPG book can integrate its game mechanics into the world itself. This is especially true when the novel involves an alternate world where leveling is the everyday norm. How would society look if people could always quantify their strength? How would that implicate in political structures, education systems, religion, etc. It’s fascinating to think about and the best LitRPG books can use these questions to build a fully realized, unique world.
  
- Subverting the System – In my opinion, some of the best LitRPG books do more than just wield a system for character progression. They challenge this system, wonder at its institution, and examine why it works. This is especially interesting when the novel starts to examine some of the standards setup in the previous trope. This whole levelling thing, how does it work? In what way can a new perspective twist things and bring to the forefront the nuance of the system.
  
- AIs are people too(or are they?) – On the flip side of the “alternate world where levelling is normal” is the question of a VRMMO system, usually portrayed as a photo-realistic game world with ultra-real NPCs that our characters build relationships with. I love it when the question of the humanity of these seemingly-sentient AI characters is addressed – is it immoral to kill villagers if they are AI and you’re doing it in a game? What if they have memories, families, and futures ahead of them? Fascinating to think about.

## The Bad (Cringeworthy Clichés):

- Godawful Game Design – There is a wonderful youtube series called Sword Art Online: Abridged, in which the famous anime(a notable early example of LitRPG) is lampooned. One recurring joke is how the characters repeatedly remark that the game is so terrible that there is no way anyone would play it if they weren’t trapped in there. This is how I feel about most of the games presented in the VRMMO LitRPG books. “You can learn any skill through hard work! Realism!” I’m not learning how to blacksmith in real life, so why would I go into game to spend my time hammering nails straight to gain 5 exp at a time? “The game world is the size of earth! And there’s no fast travel!” So I have to spend hours of my limited gaming time hitching a ride on a carriage to go from one town to another? Imagine if to play the Oregon trail you had to suffer through what your virtual pioneers suffered through – yeah, it doesn’t sound fun to me, either
  
- More Numbers than a Math Class – I earlier commented on my natural enjoyment of watching numbers increase. This enjoyment somewhat diminishes, though, when I get nothing besides numbers. I enjoy crunching numbers as much as the next guy, but when I spend more time reading about the math behind the swing of a sword than the swing itself, I’d say that’s crunchy in the wrong way – less like eating a potato chip, more like biting down on broken glass.
  
- My superpower is: I’m better than you – Power, in a narrative sense, should always come with a burden. It doesn’t matter what that burden is, it could be a physical cost, an emotional cost, or even a plot-related cost, but there has to be some kind of cost. If our hero unlocks some super secret class that lets him break the game to the point that nothing can stop him, there better be something that tries to break him back. Unfortunately, it’s all too common for LitRPG books to descend into our hero wowing all onlookers with his overpowered ability, overflowing intelligence, and endless luck. In the same way I got bored when I cheated my way to level 99 as a kid, I get bored here.
  
- Underestimating humanity– I was once reading a LitRPG book wherein our main character had a novel new approach to levelling in a world-famous game: killing NPCs. Now, morality of the question of killing a sentient AI aside, anyone who has spent more than 5 minutes on a Minecraft server will know that the first thing to happen in multiplayer games is people trying to ruin everything and create chaos. If they can destroy something, they surely will. The author seemingly forgot about human nature when he plotted his novel. Of course this specific example doesn’t apply to all LitRPG novels, but there is a trend of taking relatively simple concepts and having the characters treat them as if they are revolutionary. Anyone who has played an MMO at a high level will know that the games have been analyzed in depth for maximum optimization, and Joe Schmo throwing random attribute points around isn’t going to be able to contend with the big dogs. On the other side of things, authors tend to treat people in other worlds as if they are dumb, as if thousands of years of history and development of a system wouldn’t lead to advancements so obvious someone transmigrated to their would could develop. People are smart, guys, don’t forget that you’re one of them.
  
- [The Main Character] Kinda forgot about the [Game Mechanic] – A system implemented in a LitRPG world should be consistent. Part of the enjoyment of reading these books is watching the characters work with or around the system in order to further their goals. This becomes a point of frustration when a problem could obviously be solved by some skill or game mechanic mentioned 2 books back that the author either forgot about or decided to ignore. Imagine if Aerith only died in FFVII because Cloud forgot about the existence of phoenix downs.

## The Ugly (From Yawn to Yikes):

- Harem – “hello, I am the main character of this novel” “Oh really? Let’s have sex” “Get in line sister, the only thing higher than the number of right swipes I get on tinder is my level”
  
- Questionable Romance – I once read a story involving a character having a romance with a non-human character that had the intelligence of a child, but in the body of an adult, sentient NPC. Just because you’re trying to immerse yourself in the world does not make it okay. The “Born Sexy Yesterday” trope in sci-fi is as old as it is bad, and boy-oh-boy is it old.  
  
- The not-so-funnies – One thing a lot of novice authors fail to understand is that visual humor, especially slapstick humor, does not often translate well to text. For example, the sentence “A man gets hit by a football in the groin” does not elicit the same laughter as Hans Moleman’s cinematic classic, “Man Getting Hit by Football.” Generally speaking, the funniest authors supply their humor with wit and subtlety. Unfortunately, most LitRPG authors seem to lack these things, and it shows in their ham-fisted attempts at humor.
  
- A lack of decency – I want to sit in the meeting room where some gamedev pitches the idea of a fully real, vrmmorpg in which, get this, pain is as real as the real world and, no really, you can have sex in the game with no regulation, allowing for virtual sex crimes. Oh and on top of that, let’s allow enslaving other players in the game. Mr. Hypothetical game developer, you’re fired.


## Where to Start/What to Read:

1. [Dominion of Blades – Matt Dinniman:](https://www.amazon.com/Dominion-Blades-Adventure-Matt-Dinniman-ebook/dp/B06XDMH7ZF/) I’m almost conflicted in recommending this book, because it so far outpaces most of the genre in nuance and complexity. Matt Dinniman’s Dominion of Blades incorporates elements of mystery, action, and sci-fi to great effect, crafting a fully-realized world and populating it with believable characters. Read this one in particular if you are interested in use of LitRPG systems to serve the plot, rather than as a replacement for plot. It’s worth noting that Matt Dinniman’s other series, [Dungeon Crawler Carl](https://www.amazon.com/Dungeon-Crawler-Carl-Gamelit-Adventure-ebook/dp/B08BKGYQXW), is often recommended, though I haven’t read it yet.
  
2. [Stuff and Nonsense (Threadbare #1)](https://www.amazon.com/Threadbare-Stuff-Nonsense-Andrew-Seiple-ebook/dp/B078KGS4V4) –Andrew Seiple: Much more traditional than my first recommendation, the Threadbare series follows a sentient fluffy toy as he levels up on his quest to be the best teddy bear for his little girl. Stuffed with charm, action, and referential humor, this book serves as an approachable, thoroughly readable entry point to the genre. Some of the humor grated on me towards the end of the trilogy, but it did little to stop me from enjoying my time reading. Also, I have not read them, but there are two other trilogies set in the same world as Threadbare.
  
3. [The Wandering Inn – pirateaba:](https://wanderinginn.com/) Before I can even describe The Wandering Inn, I have to preface this recommendation by saying it is long. Really, really long. It currently sits at around 7 million words(that’s about 13 times as long as the lord of the rings trilogy), and pirateaba manages to churn out tens of thousands of new words weekly. I once recommended The Wandering Inn to a friend of mine, and he got back to me two months later, blaming me for ruining his work productivity. It is an epic, in every sense of the word, deftly bouncing from whimsy to tragedy to action to historical narrative. In the Wandering Inn you’ll spend time with a huge cast of characters in overlapping narratives set in the most splendid implementation of a “level-based” society that I’ve ever read in a LitRPG book. Not only that, but the characters are fully realized; many of my favorite characters in fiction come from this novel. I like the Wandering Inn so much, it inspired two of my in-progress novels(one with LitRPG elements!) It is a journey, but it is oh so worth it.
  
4. [Life in the North (The System Apocalypse #1)](https://www.amazon.com/Life-North-Apocalyptic-LitRPG-Apocalypse-ebook/dp/B073PNL3BP) – Tao Wong: Of my recommendations, this is probably the most standard. Life as we know it comes to an end on earth with the introduction of the System(you can guess what comes with this system). Our main character was in a “high level area,” Kuane National Park far in the north of Canada, so he gets a series of perks. I won’t spoil the plot too heavily, but I will say The System Apocalypse is notable for its adherence to and exploration of The System(we don’t, for example see entire new branches of the system added because the author decided he wanted to write about city building). The action is good, the plot keeps you guessing, and the numbers go up. I will say, as much as I love this series, the characters(Aside from John, the MC, and one or two others) are a weak point, and the humor can be hit-or-miss. Still, the books are fast-paced and easy to binge(there are 10 out of a planned 12).
  
5. [So I’m a spider, So what? 蜘蛛ですが、なにか？ Kumo desu ga, nanika? – Okina Baba:](https://www.amazon.com/Spider-What-Vol-light-novel-ebook/dp/B0723G97LX) No list of LitRPG recommendations would be complete without at least one translated novel. In my case, I’m recommending this delightful and humorous novel. A highschool girl is reincarnated as a spider in a dungeon, and she’s got nothing to do but level up and evolve. Of course, things develop from there, but it always remains fun.


So there it is. I hope you learned a little about LitRPG, the genre’s strengths and weaknesses, and where to start if you want to read. I guess, in summary, I’ll say this:
  
## I like LitRPG.




